# Eelgrass_Phenology

Data preparation and graphic exploration of the timing of eelgrass flowering and 
seeding in two eelgrass beds in southern Casco Bay, Maine.

Curtis C. Bohlen and Glenn Page


This repository contains R notebooks to read data from Excel transcripts of 
field data sheets generated by periodic surveys of the flowering status of 
Casco Bay eelgrass and a graphical analysis of results of the 2023 study.

For more on the of Team Zostera, visit the 
[Team Zostera Story Map](https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/5501a522511047108bee79f1d95eafc8)
about this project.

Eelgrass provides essential coastal ecosystems services, such as providing 
shelter, food, and habitat for marine organism, improving water quality,
reducing erosion and sequestering carbon.

Recent data prepared by Maine's Department of Environmental Protection
demonstrated significant eelgrass declines over the past 15 years. Eelgrass 
coverage in the Bay has dropped from almost 8200 acres in 2001, to just 
over 2286 acres in 2022.

Casco Bay Estuary Partnership and Team Zostera are working with several other
organizations to find ways to limit further eelgrass losses and help populations
recover, with the aim of returning Casco Bay eelgrass to 5000 acres or better by
the end of the decade.

As part of that larger effort, Team Zostera led an effort in summer of 2023 to 
document the timing of flowering and seed production in two local eelgrass beds.
The idea is that it may be possible to collect seed from healthy eelgrass beds
and plant them elsewhere, so restore lost eelgrass or help support declining 
beds nearby. Before we can experiment with these new ideas, we need to 
understand where and when Casco Bay eelgrass tends to produce seed.
